YAML topology support (#7)
qdeconinck/minitopo: README.rst

What ?
======

This repository provides a **Python runner** built on `Mininet <http://mininet.org/>`_ 
to create and control simple network topologies with multiple paths.

It can be used for a wide range of networking experiments (TCP, UDP, QUIC, etc.).
In our case, we focus mainly on **Multipath QUIC** tests between two hosts.

> Each experiment is defined by a *topology file* (``.para``) and an *experiment file* (``.xp``)

Reviewer: There is no ``.para`` nor ``.xp`` file extensions here.

which describe the network parameters and the commands to execute on each node.

Requirements
============

To run the experiments, you need the following environment:

- **Operating system:** Ubuntu 20.04+ (or WSL2 with Ubuntu)
- **Python:** version 3.8 or newer
- **Mininet:** installed system-wide
- **System tools:** ``iproute2``, ``ethtool``, ``tcpdump``, and ``tshark`` (for packet capture)
- **Optional GUI:** Wireshark (to visualize pcap files)

Quick installation:

.. code-block:: console

   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install -y mininet iproute2 ethtool tcpdump tshark python3-pip

---

Optional – QUIC experiments (using *quiche*)
--------------------------------------------

If you plan to run **QUIC or Multipath QUIC** experiments, you will also need
the `quiche <https://github.com/cloudflare/quiche>`_ library.

Build the client and server binaries with:

.. code-block:: console

   git clone --recursive https://github.com/cloudflare/quiche.git
   cd quiche
   cargo build --release --bin http3-server --bin http3-client

After compilation, you can use the following binaries in your experiment files:

- ``target/release/quiche-server``

> - ``target/release/quiche-client``

Reviewer: This command does not generate the quiche-client and quiche-server files. It should instead build quiche-client and quiche-server (not http3-client and http3-server).

Example: Running a QUIC Experiment
=============================================

This section describes a complete example showing how to establish

> a **SP QUIC** connection using this framework.

Reviewer: SP = ?

1. Launch the topology
----------------------

> Start a multi-interface topology (in our case ``topo_2``) **without any experiment**

Reviewer: It would make more sense to describe a bit the network topology that this file is creating.

to access the Mininet CLI:

.. code-block:: console

   sudo python3 runner.py -t config/topo/topo_2

This opens the interactive Mininet CLI with the nodes already connected
(client, router, server).

> ---

Reviewer: The remaining sections sounds overly complicated in a README. Why not having all these interactions in the experience file directly? Maybe you could provide a simpler case than running a QUIC experiment if you want to show some CLI interactions.

2. Start the QUIC server
------------------------

On the server node, run the ``quiche`` server binary with the appropriate
certificate and key:

.. code-block:: console

   Server_0 bash -lc 'nohup /home/achraf/quiche/target/release/quiche-server \
      --cert /home/achraf/quiche/certs/cert.pem \
      --key /home/achraf/quiche/certs/key.pem \
      --listen 0.0.0.0:4433 \

>       --root /home/achraf/quiche/quiche/examples \

Reviewer: ... your specific folder names are hardcoded in the example (`/home/achraf/...`).

      > /tmp/qserver.log 2>&1 &'

This launches the QUIC server listening on UDP port **4433**.

---

3. Start the clients (forced IP binding)
---------------------------------------

From the client node, start **two clients simultaneously**.
Each one is hardcoded to use a different source IP address,
to force two distinct QUIC paths.

.. code-block:: console

   Client_0 bash -lc 'LOCAL_BIND=10.0.0.1 /home/achraf/quiche/target/release/quiche-client \
      https://10.1.0.1:4433/ --no-verify & \

>       LOCAL_BIND=10.0.1.1 /home/achraf/quiche/target/release/quiche-client \

Reviewer: Same comment as before regarding hardcoding.

      https://10.1.0.1:4433/ --no-verify & wait'

If everything works, the clients should output:

.. code-block:: none

>    Bonjour, vous êtes bien connecté au serveur QUIC multipath

Reviewer: Probably you rely on a modified version of the page given by quiche, it is unlikely to be the one that people following this README will see.

This confirms both paths successfully connect to the same QUIC server.

---

4. Capture traffic on the router
--------------------------------

On the router node, start a packet capture to observe both flows:

.. code-block:: console

   Router_0 tcpdump -ni any udp port 4433 -c 40 -vvv > /tmp/capture.log 2>&1 &

This will capture 40 packets of QUIC traffic on port 4433
from all interfaces.

> ---

Reviewer: Stpes 2, 3 and 4 could have been part of an experience file, hiding the complexity and increasing the automation.

YAML Support (New)
==================

The runner now supports **YAML configuration files** for defining topologies and experiments,
in addition to the legacy ``.para`` format.

This new format improves readability, structure, and automation.

Legacy vs YAML Example
----------------------

**Legacy format (``topo_2``):**

.. code-block:: text

   leftSubnet:10.0
   rightSubnet:10.1
   path_c2r_0:100,20,4
   path_c2r_1:1,20,4
   path_r2s_0:10,20,10
   topoType:MultIf

**YAML format (``topo_2.yaml``):**

.. code-block:: yaml

   version: 1
   topology:
     type: MultiIf
     subnets:
       left: 10.0
       right: 10.1

     paths:
       - link_type: c2r
         id: 0
         delay_ms: 100
         queue_pkts: 20
         bw_mbit: 4

       - link_type: c2r
         id: 1
         delay_ms: 1
         queue_pkts: 20
         bw_mbit: 4

       - link_type: r2s
         id: 0
         delay_ms: 10
         queue_pkts: 20
         bw_mbit: 10

Runner Update
-------------

> The ``runner.py`` script has been updated to automatically detect and parse YAML files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``runner.py`` script automatically detects and parse YAML files
```

using the ``--topo_param_file`` option.

Example command:

.. code-block:: console

   sudo python3 runner.py -t config/topo/topo_2.yaml

When a YAML file is provided:

- The runner loads network parameters via the ``yaml`` Python module.
- The configuration format mirrors the structure of the legacy ``.para`` files.

> - Backward compatibility with existing ``.para`` files is preserved.

Reviewer: Such information should be part of the PR message, not within the README.
